Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) Overview:
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are a group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels. They include coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, rheumatic heart disease and other conditions. Four out of 5CVD deaths are due to heart attacks and strokes, and one third of these deaths occur prematurely in people under 70 years of age.

Risk Factors:
The most important behavioral risk factors of heart disease and stroke are unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol. The effects of behavioral risk factors may show up in individuals as raised blood pressure, raised blood glucose, raised blood lipids, and overweight and obesity. These "intermediate risks factors" can be measured in primary care facilities and indicate an increased risk of heart attack, stroke, heart failure and other complications.

Coronary Artery Disease (CAD):
CAD is the most common type of heart disease. It happens when the arteries that supply blood to heart muscle become hardened and narrowed. This is due to the buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls. This buildup is called atherosclerosis. As it grows, less blood can flow through the arteries. As a result, the heart muscle can't get the blood or oxygen it needs. This can lead to chest pain (angina) or a heart attack. Most heart attacks happen when a blood clot suddenly cuts off the hearts' blood supply, causing permanent heart damage.

Heart Failure:
Heart failure is a chronic, progressive condition in which the heart muscle is unable to pump enough blood to meet the body's needs for blood and oxygen. Basically, the heart can't keep up with its workload. At first the heart tries to make up for this by: Enlarging. The heart stretches to contract more strongly and keep up with the demand to pump more blood. Developing more muscle mass. The increase in muscle mass occurs because the contracting cells of the heart get bigger. Pumping faster. This helps to increase the heart's output.

Arrhythmia:
An arrhythmia is an irregular heartbeat. It means your heart is out of its usual rhythm. It may beat too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. Arrhythmias are caused by problems with the heart's electrical system. The electrical signals that tell the heart to beat may not work properly.

Lifestyle Recommendations:
- Diet: Eat a healthy diet. A healthy diet includes a variety of fruits and vegetables, whole grains, low-fat dairy products, skinless poultry and fish, nuts and legumes, and non-tropical vegetable oils. Limit saturated fat, trans fat, sodium, red meat, sweets and sugar-sweetened beverages.
- Exercise: Get regular physical activity. Aim for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity per week, or a combination of both, preferably spread throughout the week.
- Smoking: Stop smoking. Smoking is one of the most significant risk factors for CVD. Quitting smoking drastically reduces the risk of heart disease and stroke.
- Alcohol: Limit alcohol intake. Drinking too much alcohol can raise blood pressure and increase the risk of cardiomyopathy, stroke, cancer, and other diseases.
